---
layout: post
title: Display Images, PDFs, and GIFs Directly in Your Terminal
date: 2024-12-02
description: Boost your workflow with this powerful feature, especially when working remotely via SSH
tags: productivity
# categories: sample-posts
related_posts: false
thumbnail: assets/img/blog/icat-thumbnail.png
giscus_comments: true
---

{% include video.liquid path="assets/video/blog/imgcat-example.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" autoplay=true loop=true controls=true muted=true caption="Viewing JPEGs, PDFs and even GIFs directly in the terminal." %}

## Introduction

Did you know that modern terminal emulators are capable of **displaying** many file formats, including **images, PDFs and GIFs** directly in the **terminal**?
This can be **particularly useful** when connected to a **remote SSH server**.
Although similar functionality may be achieved using X11 forwarding, this feature is not always enabled on remote servers.
In addition, the X11 protocol tends to be quite slow, since it needs to forward the entire graphical user interface (GUI) application, rendering it unpractical for quickly viewing images.

## Setup

Many modern terminal emulators support various protocols for visualizing images in the terminal.
In this post, we will focus on the [iTerm2](https://iterm2.com/) and the [Kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/) terminal emulators, since these are the ones that I use on my Mac and Linux computers, respectively.

### iTerm2

In order for `iTerm2` to display images, its [Utilities Package](https://iterm2.com/documentation-utilities.html) needs to be installed.
This can be done by navigating in the menu bar to `iTerm2 > Install Shell Integration`.
A popup will open in which the "Also install iTerm2 Utilities" option needs to be selected.
{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/iterm-shell-integration.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
The utilities may then either be installed using local copy or the latest version of the tools may be fetched from a remote repository.
I recommend the latter method, which should provide better compatibility with the latest version of `iTerm2`.
The command automatically pulls a number of useful shell scripts from a remote [Git repository](https://github.com/gnachman/iTerm2-shell-integration/tree/main/utilities), which extend the functionality of `iTerm2`.
Note that, if preferred, each individual script may be manually installed by simply placing them somewhere in your `PATH`.
The one that we are interested in is the `imgcat` script.
Once it has been installed, various image formats (JPG, PNG, etc...), PDF and even animated GIF may be displayed directly in the terminal using

```sh
imgcat image.ext
```

The script comes with a number of command line options that are listed in its help page, accessible with `imgcat --help`.
Noteworthy flags include `-H` and `-W`, which configure the height and width of the images, and the `-u/--url` with which arbitrary images can be fetched from the internet using a URL.

> #### Tip
>
> Since, by default, `imgcat` preserves the original size of the image--leading to vastly varying sizes of the displayed images--I prefer setting a fixed height of the image (in my case 33% of the terminal window) such that images are displayed using a consistent size.
> This can be done by passing the `-H 33%` flag to `imgcat`.
> I use an alias to overwrite the default behavior: `alias imgcat="imgcat -H 33%"`.

### Kitty

For the `kitty` terminal, this feature is part of a set of extensions--called [kittens](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/kittens_intro/)--many of which provide similar functionality to the `iTerm2` utility scripts.
The `icat` kitten, which can be display images in the terminal, requires the [ImageMagick](https://www.imagemagick.org/) program as a dependency for performing some of the image manipulations.
Once, these have been installed, images may be viewing using:

```sh
kitten icat image.ext
```

The `icat` `kitten` also comes with a number of options which are listed in its help page.

### Enabling use through SSH

Viewing images in the terminal becomes an **essential feature** in the context where **GUI applications are not available**, as in the case of an SSH connection to a remote server.
Thankfully, both the `iTerm2` and `kitty` protocols **work seamlessly** even **through SSH**.
All that needs to be done is to also install the `iTerm2` `imgcat` script (following the procedure described above) or the `kitty` terminal on the remote server.

#### Automatically Dispatching to iTerm2 or Kitty

Note that the `iTerm2` and `kitty` protocols are not compatible.
Therefore, if the `iTerm2` terminal emulator was used to SSH into the remote server then the `kitten icat` command will not work.
Therefore, it would be convenient to configure the shell on the remote server to **detect the terminal** that was used to SSH and, based on that, **automatically dispatch** to the appropriate command.
This can be achieved by storing the terminal emulator in use in an environment variable on the host and then sending it to the remote server.
In the `iTerm2` settings enable the `Advanced > Experimental Features > Set LC_TERMINAL=iTerm2` option.
This will set the `LC_TERMINAL` environment variable to `iTerm2` whenever a shell is started in `iTerm2`.

Now, this environment variable needs to be propagated to the remote server.
The `iTerm2` documentation states that `OpenSSH` passes this environment variable by default to the remote servers.
However, this doesn't seem to be the case for me.
In any case, environment variables may be sent explicitly to the remote server by setting the option `SendEnv LC_TERMINAL` in the `~/.ssh/config` file.
This option can be enabled for all servers using the following wildcard at the top of the configuration:

```config
Host *
  SendEnv LC_TERMINAL
```

> Note that in order for this to work, the remote server needs to be configured such that it accepts sent environment variables from the host.
> Further information on enabling this feature can be found by consulting the `sshd_config` `man` pages (see for instance the `AcceptEnv` entry).

On the remote server, inside the `.bashrc` or `.zshrc`, this environment variable may be queried and, accordingly, the `icat` command can be dispatched to the appropriate routine:

```sh
if [ "$LC_TERMINAL" = "iTerm2" ]; then
  alias icat="imgcat -H 33%"
else
  alias icat="kitten icat"
fi
```

> #### Waring: Compatibility with `tmux`
>
> Unfortunately, in my case, both of these methods failed inside of `tmux` sessions.
> For some users, this is resolved by enabling the `set -gq allow-passthrough` in the `tmux` configuration.

## Conclusion

Terminal emulators have **come a long way** from their initial exclusively **text-based input/output** modality.
Today, they offer a surprising array of features, including the ability to **display images, PDFs and GIFs** directly within the terminal.
This functionality is a **game-changer**, particularly for **remote work**, where traditional graphical interfaces may not be available or feasible.
