---
layout: post
title: Pimp My `man`
date: 2024-10-28
description: Replace the default `man` pager with something with a bit more bling
tags: productivity, microtip
# categories: sample-posts
related_posts: false
thumbnail: assets/img/blog/pimp-my-ride.png
giscus_comments: true
---

# Introduction

This article follows up on my previous blog [post]({% post_url 2024-10-21-Cheatsheet %}) on improving the experience of digging through the documentation of command line interface tools.
In that article, I detailed my preferred method for fetching documentation using the [cheat.sh](cheat.sh) website.

This method, however, requires an internet connection.
What if Microsoft decides to do another automatic software update, during the night, and crashes the worldwide web, again (looking at you [CrowdStrike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2024_CrowdStrike-related_IT_outages))?
This would leave the rest of humanity with only the `man` pages to piece together all of human knowledge.
Could we not make the experience of interacting with the `man` pages a bit more pleasant?
That will be the goal of this article.

# Manpager

Did you know that you can choose the application that is used for displaying the `man` pages?
By default, it is set to the `less` pager, which doesn't provide the best user experience due to its lack of proper syntax highlighting.
The environment variable `MANPAGER` defines the program used for viewing the `man` pages.

## `bat`

My favorite alternative to `less` is the [bat](https://github.com/sharkdp/bat) program.
It is part of series of common GNU CLI tools that have been rewritten in Rust, and often extended with additional functionality.
This list includes `bat` as a drop-in replacement for `cat` and `less`, [fd](https://github.com/sharkdp/fd) for `find` and [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) for `grep`.
`bat` provides syntax highlighting for most programming languages and has even replaced `cat` and `less` for me entirely:

```sh
alias less="bat"
alias cat="bat -pp"
```

By default, `bat` acts like a pager similar to `less`.
The `-pp` flag disables the paging option and prints the entire file, making `bat` function exactly like `cat`.

Moreover, it can be used as the `MANPAGER` with the following command taken from their [README](https://github.com/sharkdp/bat)

```sh
export MANPAGER="sh -c 'col -bx | bat -l man -p'"
```

Check out the results:

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/manpager_less_vs_bat.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}

<div class="caption">
    Comparison of less (left) and bat (right) as Manpagers
</div>

> On my Mac, this command worked out of the box.
> However, on my Linux machine I was encountering formatting issues due to lingering color codes in the output (e.g., `1mgrep`).
> From the `bat` documentation, this issue can be resolved by setting the following environment variable `export MANROFFOPT="-c"`

## Neovim

Alternatively, you can use `neovim` as your `MANPAGER` which will even respect your color scheme

```sh
export MANPAGER='nvim +Man!'
```

{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/blog/manpager_less_vs_nvim.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}

<div class="caption">
    Comparison of less (left) and neovim (right) as Manpagers
</div>

However, since it also loads all of your plugins (unless you were diligent in setting up lazy loading of packages), it will necessarily be a bit slower than `bat`, which is why I use it instead.

---

# Source

I was made aware of the `MANPAGER` environment variable by this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ab3rY0X5kD4) from DistroTube.
Go check him out, he makes great Linux related content!
