---
layout: post
title: Pimp My `man`
date: 2024-10-14
description: Replace the default `man` pager with something with a bit more bling
tags: productivity, microtip
# categories: sample-posts
related_posts: false
thumbnail: assets/img/blog/pimp-my-ride.png
giscus_comments: true
---

# Introduction

This article follows up on my previous blog [post]({% post_url 2024-10-21-Cheatsheet %}) on improving the experience digging through documentation on command line interface tools.
In that article, I go into my preferred method for fetching documentation [cheat.sh](cheat.sh) but it relies on an internet connection.
What if Microsoft decides to do another automatic update during the night and crashes the worldwide web again (looking at your [CrowdStrike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2024_CrowdStrike-related_IT_outages))?
The reset of humanity would be left with only the `man` pages to piece together all of human knowledge.
Could we not make the experience of interacting with the `man` pages a bit better?

# Manpager

Did you know that you can replace the default reader for displaying `man` pages?
By default, it is set to the `less` pager, which doesn't provide the best user experience due to the lack of proper syntax highlighting.
The environment variable `MANPAGER` defines the program used for viewing the `man` pages.

## `bat`

My favorite alternative to `less` is the [bat](https://github.com/sharkdp/bat) program.
It is part of series of common GNU CLI tools that have been rewritten in Rust (and often significantly improve).
This list includes `bat` as a drop-in replacement for `cat`, [fd](https://github.com/sharkdp/fd) for `find` and [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) for `grep`.
`bat` provides syntax highlighting for most programming languages (based on the file extension (check if true)) and has even replaced `cat` for me entirely:

```sh
alias cat="bat -pp"
```

Moreover, it can be used as the `MANPAGER` with the following command taking from their [README](https://github.com/sharkdp/bat)

```sh
export MANPAGER="sh -c 'col -bx | bat -l man -p'"
```

Check out the results

On my Mac, this worked out of the box but on my Linux homeserver I was encountering formatting issues due to color codes (e.g., ).
From their docs, this issue can be resolved by setting the following environment variable:

```sh
export MANROFFOPT="-c"
```

## Neovim

Alternatively, you can even use `neovim` as your `MANPAGER` using:
```sh
export MANPAGER='nvim +Man!'
```

This will even respect your color scheme!
However, since it also loads all of your plugins (unless you were intentional setting up lazy loading of packages) and therefore it is a bit slower that `bat`, which is why I use it instead.


# Source

I was made aware of this option from this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ab3rY0X5kD4) from DistroTube.
Go check him out, he makes great content!
